Heading: Production Possibilities Curve
Last Modified: Wed May  1 18:41:16 2024
Content:
The production possibilities curve (PPC) is a graph that shows all of the different combinations of output that can be produced given current resources and technology. 
Sometimes called the production possibilities frontier (PPF), the PPC illustrates scarcity and tradeoffs.
A production possibilities frontier, or PPF, defines the set of possible combinations of goods and services a society can produce given the resources available. 
Choices outside the PPF are unattainable (at least in any sustainable way), and choices inside the PPF are inefficient.
All choices along a PPF display productive efficiency—it is impossible to use society’s resources to produce more of one good without decreasing production of the other good.
The specific choice along a PPF that reflects the mix of goods society most desires is the choice with allocative efficiency.
For example, suppose Carmen splits her time as a carpenter between making tables and building bookshelves. 
The PPC would show the maximum amount of either tables or bookshelves she could build given her current resources. 
The shape of the PPC would indicate whether she had increasing or constant opportunity costs.
It shows the trade-off between producing one good versus the other when all resources are efficiently allocated.
Downward Sloping: The curve slopes downward due to the scarcity of resources. Producing more of one good necessitates giving up some of the other good.
Bowed Out Shape: The curve is bowed outward from the origin due to increasing opportunity costs of shifting resources toward one good.
Boundary: All points on the curve show maximum output combinations when resources are fully employed. Points outside the curve are unobtainable.
The curve can shift outwards (increase in resources/technology) or inwards (decrease in resources/technology).
Outward Shift: Economic growth, new resources, technological progress.
Inward Shift: Natural disasters, war, resource depletion.
The PPC illustrates scarcity and opportunity costs - to get more of one good, the opportunity cost is less of the other good.
Operating inside the PPC is inefficient and represents underutilized resources.
The curve helps analyze trade-offs between consumption today vs investment for future production.